MSC4039: Add an MSC for a new Widget API action to upload files into the media repository (#4039)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/4039-widget-api-media.md

# MSC4039: Access the Content repository with the Widget API

[MSC2762](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2762) specifies a Widget API that
is able to receive events from and write events to the room that is loaded in the client. But beside
the room events, homeservers also manage media content for the users. While widgets can already
download media, given they acquired the URL of the homeserver, they can't upload new media into the
room. This would be useful to post images or attachments, but also to upload larger files that can't
be stored in a room event, like a whiteboard that can easily grow larger than 64kb.

This proposal aims to bring the functionality of uploading media to the content repository into the
widget specification. It should provide the same features that the
[“Upload Content” endpoint](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.7/client-server-api/#post_matrixmediav3upload)
of the Client-Server API provides. 

## Proposal

The widget API is extended with a new url parameter that can be requested and that will tell the
widget the URL of the homeserver API the user is currently using:

* `matrix_base_url`: The URL of the homeserver API.

> The widget API is extended with a two new interface to upload files into the content repository. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The widget API is extended with two new interfaces to upload files into the content repository. The
```

the room events, homeservers also manage media content for the users. While widgets can already
download media, given they acquired the URL of the homeserver, they can't upload new media into the
room. This would be useful to post images or attachments, but also to upload larger files that can't
be stored in a room event, like a whiteboard that can easily grow larger than 64kb.

This proposal aims to bring the functionality of uploading media to the content repository into the
widget specification. It should provide the same features that the
[“Upload Content” endpoint](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.7/client-server-api/#post_matrixmediav3upload)
of the Client-Server API provides. 

## Proposal

The widget API is extended with a new url parameter that can be requested and that will tell the
widget the URL of the homeserver API the user is currently using:

* `matrix_base_url`: The URL of the homeserver API.

The widget API is extended with a two new interface to upload files into the content repository. The
user must manually approve the following capability before the actions can be used:

> - `m.upload_file`: Let the widget access the user directory.

Author: Yes, I corrected it. There were also other places I missed before.

```json
{
  "api": "fromWidget",
  "widgetId": "20200827_WidgetExample",
  "requestid": "generated-id-1234",
  "action": "get_media_config",
  "data": {},
  "response": {
    "m.upload.size": 1000,
  }
}
```

The `response` is a mirrored representation of the original [content repository configuration][config] API.

### Upload file

The following diagram shows the (optionally encrypted) upload file flow.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant W as widget
    participant C as client
    participant H as homeserver
    W->>C: fromWidget upload_file
    alt e2ee room
    C->>C: encrypt file
    end
    C->>H: upload file
    H->>C: mxc
    C->>W: fromWidget upload_file (mxc, EncryptedFile)
    W->>C: fromWidget send_event
    alt e2ee room
    C->>C: encrypt event
    end
    C->>H: send event
    H->>C: event ID
    C->>W: fromWidget send_event (event ID)
```

To trigger the action to upload a file, widgets will use a new `fromWidget` request with the action
`upload_file` which takes the following shape:

```json
{
  "api": "fromWidget",
  "widgetId": "20200827_WidgetExample",
  "requestid": "generated-id-1234",
  "action": "upload_file",
  "data": {

>     "file": "some-content"

Reviewer 2: 'file' here sort of implies that this is a https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/File which it is not. This sort of goes with my other comment below on what type this is and what it's called.

  }
}
```

> `data.file` is a `XMLHttpRequestBodyInit` that is supported as a data type in the `postMessage` API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`data.file` is an `XMLHttpRequestBodyInit` that is supported as a data type in the `postMessage` API.
```

> `data.file` is a `XMLHttpRequestBodyInit` that is supported as a data type in the `postMessage` API.

Reviewer 2: This seems like quite a random type? Why not just blob or something? Do we explicitly want the API to support passing, say, FormData through directly?

Reviewer 3: This is not easy to answer, since the team members originally proposing that type have left the team. We did not change the type as we updated the MSC because the upload part is already implemented. The reason seems to be "Something that can be sent to XMLHttpRequest.send (typically a File)." https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-widget-api/pull/86/files#diff-67e6f0676307a87283ca4533526de9b3ac4ff3bafdd0d016947e40e2b3574757R693-R694. However we can follow your reasoning that probably a Blob (which is one of the types forming this union type) would make more sense.

Reviewer 4: I'd concur here that a Blob makes sense, and reduces the amount of uncertainty around a type.

For those playing at home.

`type XMLHttpRequestBodyInit = Blob | BufferSource | FormData | URLSearchParams | string;`

So in actual fact we *can* change the MSC to a Blob, and prior implementations shouldn't need to change.

adjusted accordingly for this single request. The widget is expected to be able to handle the
[`M_NOT_YET_UPLOADED`][download] error response in the usual way the client forwards client-server-API errors to
widgets.

The client SHOULD NOT modify the received file from the content repository before responding to the widget in
unencrypted rooms.

#### Request (Encrypted)

It is the widget's responsibility to know if the file is encrypted, e.g. by checking if the
[`EncryptedFile`][encryptedfile] metadata is stored next to the `mxc:` URI. If so, it must be provided in the request to
the client alongside it.

```json
{
  "api": "fromWidget",
  "widgetId": "20200827_WidgetExample",
  "requestid": "generated-id-1234",
  "action": "download_file",
  "data": {
    "content_uri": "mxc://...",
    "timeout_ms": 20000,
    "encryption": EncryptedFile
  }
}
```

#### Response

```json
{
  "api": "fromWidget",
  "widgetId": "20200827_WidgetExample",
  "requestid": "generated-id-1234",
  "action": "download_file",
  "data": <see above>,
  "response": {
    "file": "some-content"
  }
}
```

> `response.file` mirrors `data.file` of the `upload_file` action and is a `XMLHttpRequestBodyInit` that is supported as a

Reviewer 2: As above for 'file', plus it will be the widget's job to support whatever the client decides to send it of the union of different types, which might be an easy trap for widget authors to fall into. The impl in the react-sdk PR just always sends a blob anyway.

Reviewer 3: if decide to change the type to Blob, perhaps calling both fields blob would make the most sense.

data type in the `postMessage` API.

If the widget did not get approved for the capability required to send the event, the client MUST
send an error response (as required currently by the capabilities system for widgets).

## Potential issues

[MSC3911][MSC3911] proposes a way to link media (files) to events such that there is a 1:n relationship for event ->
file. Particularly, each file must be attached to exactly one event, and copied using the proposed copy API to attach it
again to another event. Since the client is unaware of event content sent by widgets per [MSC2762][MSC2762], it cannot
automatically handle copying any referenced media and the burden is hence on the widget, which would require a change to
the API described above to add the `copy` endpoint. Additionally, the event sending payload from MSC2762 will need to be
extended such that whenever a widget includes references to files in an event, it is required to provide them to the
client in the `send_event` request so the client knows to attach the files.

> 

Reviewer 2: Also, large files will have to be sent over the postmessage API in one big lump, so this isn't going to scale up to anything over a few tens of MB very well.

Reviewer 3: One alternative already described could be letting widgets directly access (parts of) the C-S API in some way.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 3: we could of course also pass an access token to the widget by URI param or with a request, but that seems to contradict the whole idea of the widget API
